+++
date = "2018-07-19"
title = "The Art of Debate"
+++

Someone told me the other day that I’m not good at arguing. Upon reflection, I was forced to agree. So in the spirit of self-improvement I decided to write a series of pieces practicing the art of persuasion. Alas, like my New Year’s resolution to “workout more” this exercise was never started. The problem was that I first needed to answer the root question: *why do I want to be good at arguing?*
 
Like a proper millennial, my first attempt at answering the question was to look inward. I waded through the existential questions that plague all young people in their 20s. Who am I? What do I want from life? Where is my career heading? When will I be truly happy? Or rather, reframing to be more relevant: What will debating skill give me? Happiness? probably not. At best, I might gain a fleeting modicum of satisfaction. For happiness I’m probably better off moving to a remote tropical island like the one from the default screen saver I see every time I walk into my windowless cubicle. (A truly soul crushing juxtaposition.) How about career success? This reason seemed more plausible. But one year out of college, I am self aware enough to realize that I don’t have much insight into career success.
 
I was, however, willing to be convinced by an outside voice. For further enlightenment I turned to arguably (lol) the most continuous and contentious hall of debate: cable tv. After a twelve hour binge watching session of split screens, spittle flying, and screeching accusations I decided that I had completed my research due diligence. Coincidentally this was also the point at which I took an Advil for my splitting headache. I had the dry mouth, sensitive eyes, and headache of a hangover. I even had the fuzzy half memories. Then there was the regret. Tons of regret. Because at the end of 12 hours nothing had changed. It was like seeing soldiers in the trenches of WWI but the casualties were low blood pressure, civility, and critical thinking. There was a futility and pointlessness to the tv interactions where neither side would give ground. 
 
But clearly there had to be a reason behind the circus. Maybe the hope is that the “better debater” will change the minds of viewers. The person who convinces the most spectators wins the debate. The problem with this theory is that TV viewers’ opinions aren’t actually regularly measured (although there are regularly large scale public opinion polls). It seems far more likely that the commentators are paid for the performance. For the excitement and spectacle of the debate. It is essentially a less physical form of boxing where you win by not conceding to the other side. Words are spoken not because of the ideas behind them but for their own sake. The syllables simply fill up time in, at best, a self-serving way and at worst, a manner destructive to society. If being good at arguing is synonymous with talking heads then it doesn’t seem worth it to me. 
 
Society puts a premium on convictions. An unsurprising fact since convictions make good TV. In fact, talking heads are defined by their strident defenses and unmovable opinions. It is worrying that they set an example for how discourse occurs because they are rewarded for blinding vitriol. To be good at debating is to cling to one’s position, no matter what. Having a winner and loser of a debate simply reinforces destructive ideals about debating. Quixotically, I fantasize about a world of clear minded, considerate discussion. 

A debater should be measured by their response to a valid opposing point. A good debater should acknowledge the merits of a position and build upon common ground to achieve a mutual understanding. Agreement isn’t necessary. People each have their own unique experiences and perspectives that shape and define what they believe. The idea that consensus will always be achievable is naive, but compromise offers an alternative. 

In fact, I respect the politician who flips sides on an issue. It is a sign that they can think critically. It is a sign that they can keep an open mind. It is a sign that they can consider new points of view and new information as they receive it and update their personal position. Then, the true politician expresses those views in a coherent, concise, and convincing manner, trying to communicate why they believe what they believe. A critical component is the understanding that every issue is nuanced and other views may also be valid. This is the purest form of debating: a personal and cyclical process of synthesis and communication, one that allows for evolution and change. 

So do I want to be a good debater? Not in the modern sense. But just because modern times have distorted and twisted debating doesn’t mean that the underlying concept of being able to successfully understand and communicate an idea shouldn’t be a goal one strives for. As for career success, the blinding vitriol approach to arguing hardly seems like a way to curry favor with coworkers, clients, and superiors (unless you are specifically in the cable television industry). So if being a good debater requires immovable convictions and a combative stance then I’ll pass and take my chances on career development. 

My idealism is all well and good until the time for talk comes to an end and action must be taken. We can listen, we can empathize, and we can understand multiple viewpoints but when a decision must be made there can only be one winner. May the best debater win.  




